Update EIP-1108 with latest gas metering benchmarks (#1987)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-1108.md

the computational cost of `ECADD`, `ECMUL`, and pairing checks (excepting the
constant) has dropped roughly an order of magnitude across the board.

Also, optimizations in the bn library [in 2018](https://github.com/paritytech/bn/pull/9) and [2019](https://github.com/paritytech/bn/pull/14)
used by the [Parity client](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-ethereum) led to a 
significant performance boost we 
[benchmarked](https://gist.github.com/pdyraga/4649b74436940a01e8221d85e80bfeef) 
and compared against the [previous 

> results](https://gist.github.com/zac-williamson/838410a3da179d47d31b25b586c15e53).  

Reviewer: Oh actually I think the link here is flipped---the `[benchmarked]` link needs to change, while the `[previous results]` link should continue to reflect the original analysis that set the current gas price.

Author: Thanks for spotting that! I switched the links over

> ## The Rationale Behind Lowering Gas Costs  

Reviewer 2: There is a standard "rationale" section in EIPs. Also it seems the layout of this EIP follows an outdated old template. Have a look at the current one: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/eip-X.md

Author: Heya, thanks for pointing that out. I've pushed a change that uses the eip-X formatting

### Existing protocols would benefit immensely from cheaper elliptic curve cryptography

Fast elliptic curve cryptography is a keystone of a growing number of protocols built on top of Ethereum. To list a few:  

>   [The AZTEC protocol](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/AZTEC) utilizes the elliptic curve precompiles to construct private tokens, with zero-knowledge transaction logic, via the [ERC1723](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/1723) and [ERC1724](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/1724) standard.  

Reviewer 2: Can you make these into a bullet point list? It would look nicer that way after formatting.

Author: Done

  [Matter Labs](https://github.com/matter-labs/matter-network) utilizes the precompiles to implement Ignis, a scaling solution with a throughput of 500txns per second  
  [Rollup](https://github.com/rollup/rollup) utilizes the precompiles to create L2 scaling solutions, where the correctness of transactions is gauranteed by main-net, without an additional consensus layer  

>   [ZEther](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~buenz/papers/zether.pdf) uses precompiles `0x06` and `0x07` to construct confidential transactions  

Reviewer 2: This is nitpicking, but above you define what precompiles the addresses 0x6 and 0x7 refer to. Maybe it is easier to read if you use `ECADD` and `ECMUL` here.

Author: Pushed a change that uses `ECADD` and `ECMUL`

These are all technologies that have been, or are in the process of being, deployed to main-net. There protocols would all benefit from reducing the gas cost of the precompiles.  

> To give a concrete example, it currently costs `820,000` gas to validate the cryptography in a typical AZTEC confidential transaction. If the gas schedule for the precompiles correctly reflected their load on the Ethereum network, this cost would be `197,000` gas. This significantly increases the potential use cases for private assets on Ethereum. AZTEC has a number of cryptographic protocols that we plan deploy to Ethereum, but are at the limits of what is practical given the current precompile costs:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give a concrete example, it currently costs `820,000` gas to validate the cryptography in a typical AZTEC confidential transaction. If the gas schedule for the precompiles correctly reflected their load on the Ethereum network, this cost would be `197,000` gas. This significantly increases the potential use cases for private assets on Ethereum. AZTEC is planning to deploy a number of cryptographic protocols Ethereum, but these are at the limits of what is practical given the current precompile costs:  
```

* Confidential weighted voting  
* Partial-order filling over encrypted orders, for private decentralized exchanges  
* Anonymous identity sharing proofs (e.g. proving you are on a whitelist, without revealing who you are)  
* Many-to-one payments and one-to-many confidential payments, as encrypted communication channels between main-net and L2 applications  

> For ZK-SNARK based protocols on Ethereum, EIP-1108 will not only reduce the gas costs of verifying ZK-SNARKs substantially, but can also aid in [batching together multiple ZK-SNARK proofs](https://github.com/matter-labs/Groth16BatchVerifier). This is also a technique that can be used to split up monolithic ZK-SNARK circuits into a batch of ZK-SNARKs with smaller individual circuit sizes, which makes ZK-SNARKs both easier to construct and deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For zk-SNARK based protocols on Ethereum, EIP-1108 will not only reduce the gas costs of verifying zk-SNARKs substantially, but can also aid in [batching together multiple zk-SNARK proofs](https://github.com/matter-labs/Groth16BatchVerifier). This is also a technique that can be used to split up monolithic zk-SNARK circuits into a batch of zk-SNARKs with smaller individual circuit sizes, which makes zk-SNARKs both easier to construct and deploy.
```

ZEther transactions currently cost ~`6,000,000` gas. This EIP would would reduce this to ~`1,000,000` gas, which makes the protocol more practical.  

To summarise, the are a number of protocols that currently exist on main-net, that would benefit immensely from this EIP. Elliptic curve cryptography can provide valuable solutions for Ethereum, such as scaling and privacy, and the scope and scale of these solutions can be increased if the gas costs for the `bn128` precompiles accurately reflects their computational load on the network.

### Cheaper elliptic curve cryptography can be used to trade storage for computation  

> Solutions such as Rollup and Ignis can be used to batch groups of individal transactions into a zk-snark proof, with the on-chain state being represented by a small Merkle root, instead of a large number of account balances.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solutions such as Rollup and Ignis can be used to batch groups of individal transactions into a zk-SNARK proof, with the on-chain state being represented by a small Merkle root, instead of a large number of account balances.  
```

> If ZK-SNARK verification costs are decreased, these solutions can be deployed for a wider range of use cases and more Rollup-style transactions can be processed per block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If zk-SNARK verification costs are decreased, these solutions can be deployed for a wider range of use cases and more Rollup-style transactions can be processed per block.
```

| ------------- | --------- | -----------------------------  | ------------------- |
| `ECADD`       | `0x06`    | 500<sup>[1]</sup>              | 150                 |
| `ECMUL`       | `0x07`    | 40 000<sup>[1]</sup>           | 6 000               |
| Pairing check | `0x08`    | 80 000 * k + 100 000<sup>[2]</sup>| 34 000 * k + 45 000    |

The gas costs for `ECADD` and `ECMUL` are updates to the costs listed in
EIP-196, while the gas costs for the pairing check are updates to the cost
listed in EIP-197. Updated gas costs have been adjusted to the less performant 

> client which is Parity, according to benchmarks<sup>[3]</sup>. The updated gas costs are scaled relative to the `ecrecover` precompile.

Reviewer 2: Can you explain how it is relative to ecrecover?

Author: I pushed a change that describes the `ecrecover` scaling. The `ecrecover` precompile took 116 microseconds to run in the benchmark. If we assume the `ecrecover` gas price of 3,000 gas is a fair price, we get a price of 25.86 gas per microsecond of an precompile algorithm's run-time.  

The pairing precompile took 3,037 microseconds to compute 1 pairing, and 14,663 microseconds to compute 10 pairings. From this, the pairing algorithm has a fixed 'base' run-time of 1,745 microseconds, plus 1,292 microseconds per pairing. We can split the run-time into 'fixed cost' and 'linear cost per pairing' components because of the structure of the algorithm.  

Then using a 'fair' price of 25.86 gas per microsecond, we get a gas formula of ~`35,000 * k + 45,000` gas, where `k` is the number of pairings being computed.  

n.b. of course, I am also making an explicit assumption that the relative ratio between the run-times of `ecrecover` and the pairing precompile are constant irrespective of the specs or architecture of the underlying machine. I think this is a reasonable assumption, as the arithmetic operations being performed are extremely similar (modular multiplications in 256 bit finite fields). However more benchmarks would be useful here.

Reviewer 2: @zac-williamson @Shadowfiend I think it would be nice to include the above text in the EIP. Can you add it?

Reviewer: I believe it's in there, right? @ https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1108.md#specification, ‘i.e. in the benchmark…’

Reviewer 2: Some of it is, but this is a more comprehensive description.

This EIP does not require Parity or Geth to deploy new cryptographic libraries, as fast bn128 algorithms have already been integrated into these clients. This goal of proposing this EIP for Istanbul, is to supplement [EIP-1829](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md) (arithmetic over generic elliptic curves), providing an immediate solution to the pressing problem of expensive cryptography, while more advanced solutions are developed, defined and deployed.

## Test Cases  

> As no underlying algorithms are not being changed, there are no additional test cases to specify.  

Reviewer: “As no underlying algorithms are being* changed.”, or we're changing ALL OF THE THINGS :)

Reviewer 3: > “As no underlying algorithms are being* changed.”, or we're changing ALL OF THE THINGS :)

Came here to point that language out =)

Reviewer: I'll push a PR that fixes it in a few.
